>> [unedited transcript made by automated process]
>> Yeah.
Hello.
Welcome to the high school. Really? Podcast. I'm your host,
Cameron Gera. Uh, on engineering I.T. pro
T.V.. And with me today is Taylor
Fausak one of my boss? Actually,
he's not. He's on my team, but he's my boss as well, but
we're just super excited to be here today. How you doing today?
I'm
>> doing well, Cam. Thanks for hosting me on the show
>> this week. Of course, man. We're on episode
35. That's a big deal. So
thank you all for listening. And we're
hoping you'd like to stick around.
So tell what we're talking about today.
>> Eso today we're gonna be digging into a post
about kind of, maybe versus
either and error reporting. But
before we get to that, I think we have
announcement from the community at
large, not an announcement from us that we should talk about a little
bit, which is the G.H.C.
2021 proposal has been accepted.
So, uh, yeah, very
exciting. Cam, I know we talked about this on a previous
episode of the podcast, but you got anything to say about it now that
it's accepted?
>> I mean, I think I think it's cool I think it's interesting to see
the data and how the votes went. A Sfar. It's the committee.
Selecting what? To bring in what? Not to bring in.
Um, still for me. Personally shocked. Overloaded strings
isn't there? But that's okay. You know, we could
continue Thio enable that extension for
us. It helps with our, uh,
ap Development.
>> Yeah, I think it's one of the most popular extensions. But
this since it's the first cut of this new process, I
think they tried to play it a little safe. And overloaded
strings can introduce a lot of ambiguity. So I see why.
Maybe they left it off.
>> That's fair. That's fair. Yeah. I mean, you know,
they did great work with keeping it backwards
compatible with high school 2010 and all that stuff.
Um, but yeah. Do you have any,
like, uh, just give ah, listener quick
point of like, what's the difference between this and, you know,
a language standard?
>> Sure. Once again, I'll point back to our previous
episode in October, where we talked about this in a little more detail.
But, um, this isn't a full blown new
version of the Haskell language report, so It's
not like a new standard. And the difference
is that are, like the pragmatic differences that
G.H.C.. 2021 is a language extension
that just enables a bunch of other language
extensions. So it's like an alias for these other
things. Um, and a new version of the
standard would be hopefully
well specified enough that someone
will be able to implement a different compiler that
implements that standard. So most of the time,
G.H.C. is the only compiler that we talk about. But
there are others, and there have been others in the past. And,
uh, the language special specification
could allow more of those in the future.
>> No. Awesome. Well, thanks for that tidbit. We, uh, you
know, obviously, like Taylor said, go check back at
our other podcast where we talked to more in depth
about that, or feel free to check it out in this week.
This week's edition of Haskell Weekly.
>> Mm. So, but yeah, like I mentioned,
that's not what we're here to talk about today.
Instead, we're gonna be talking about maybe and
either Right, Cam?
>> Yeah. Yeah, I think,
uh, you know, for those who have been in programming and
Haskell for a period of time. You've come across
this decision of Do I use an either here or do I use maybe
here and today the post We're gonna be kind
of diving more into is, you know, leaning
more towards Hey, use either here because
you don't wanna lose necessarily information
on I think we can easily
trying to navigate that by, you know,
e I mean, it's really up to you know
what the case is, right? Like everything's different.
Nobody when you're, you
know, saying for input like maybe it's generally OK for
an input like it's either there it's not on.
Do you can kind of, you know, but that could also work for either, Like
it z not there and it gives you some useful
information. So, um yeah, I
think you know, he kind of dives in here. Um,
do you want to kind of give what his nutshell per
se is?
>> Sure. And even before we get to the like,
30,000 ft overview of this, some of the
motivation, so maybe is
sort of, in a way, Haskell's answer to
knowl most other mainstream programming
languages have a concept of Knoll
that is a valid value for any
type. And this is frequently referred to as the billion
dollar mistake because it causes so many
bugs and weird program behaviors.
Andan Haskell We don't have that. And instead, if
you had something that would be knowable in another
language in Haskell, you model that with maybe.
And I think the high level overview
of Roberts, the Post author
here of his like what he's putting forth here
is, if you are wanting to
return, maybe perhaps you
should return either instead, so that if
something does go wrong, you'll know which
thing went wrong rather than just like, Well, something somewhere went
wrong. Good luck, Which is better
than a no pointer error, but
maybe only a little bit,
>> right? I mean, if you're parsing through some code and you're
like, I could be these five
possible, you know, no values or nothing
values like which one is it? Um,
you know, the fact that Haskell has the
either concept really should allow us
to a t least consider it when we are
choosing and reaching for. Maybe
E
>> will say that in our day to day life,
developing a Web application at I.T. Pro
T.V.. We frequently do
both types of conversions where we have a maybe
value, and we want to attach additional
information to it in the case where it's nothing
or we have some value that already
has extra information on it. And we want to strip that
off to get a maybe value. And usually this is to
meet, you know, the various contracts of Oh, we need to turn a
We need to give a maybe to this function and we haven't either or vice
versa. Um, but very often we
have functions that give us back a maybe, and we have
to add extra information there that says like, Oh, we were looking at
this field and we expected this type and it was
that type. But we got this value which didn't parse for this
reason. And that's way more useful for us when we're
debugging that problem than just getting nothing
like something went wrong.
>> Who knows, Right? And I feel like, you
know, there's a
large Haskell ecosystem out there, you know,
libraries and packages that help people solve
problems. And, uh, you know, I
think we've had people file
issues and bugs on certain packages
because this returning them, maybe. And there's some sort of failure
that they don't have any idea to Why that happened
on DSO. You know, the author here kind of
uses servant multi part as
a, um kind of
example to say, Hey, here's something that used to
use Maybe now it's using on either, and it's
honestly a better package for it.
>> Yeah, and for those that may not be familiar.
Ah, multi part is a part of, like,
an http form payload. So
whenever you have a form on a HTML page and you hit
submit that gets submitted as a multi part and then that
has to be parsed on the server Onda, sometimes it's
chase on. Sometimes it's, uh, it looks like a query
string. But regardless of how it looks, you're parsing that.
And if it if you can't parse it, you want to know why
rather than just returning a 400 to the user and
saying Sorry, try again.
>> Yeah, I mean, that's not really giving anybody any information
to go anywhere. I mean, you know, it's
kind of that whole just putting somebody. You
always telling that person returned. Right? And there you go. In a
circle?
>> Yeah,
on den to kind of support
this suggested shift into
either versus Maybe, um, he
proposes. Or maybe I'm not sure if he's proposing this function
or if he's talking about one that already exists called unexplained for doing that
conversion I talked about just a minute ago where you haven't either. And you
need a maybe, um And we
recently introduced to functions like this to
our prelude where we call them
note and hush and, uh, may have
come from somewhere else again, I don't know, but there's such simple functions. They're
easy to write, so note takes it maybe value
and the like, um, string.
Normally that you want to give on the error and gives you back
in, either. And then hush goes the other way. So it's a little
evocative of how they work.
>> It's very similar to unexplained hushes.
>> Right on. Does air are very nice because that you
can use them in line. Really? You know, succinctly
and works out nicely. Um,
and I think he has an interesting example here of talking
about ace on the Jason Library, where
it has a bunch of different functions for doing
decoding that return various different. You
know, he's a day neither. Is it a part, sir? Is it a maybe, is it?
Whatever. Um, and it feels like you
could just have one of those, and then these notes
or hush type functions, Thio, you know,
massage it in the shape you
>> want. Mhm.
Yeah. And I mean, you know, a son's a good
example of, ah, library that does have a
lot of support for either, Um,
whereas, you know, obviously
they have Maybe, and I think that's kind of their default, but
they've, you know, with the New Age and
everybody realized Oh, yeah, we may want this air
information passed along, You know,
they've kind of added this either, um,
either functions into their library.
So much appreciated. I know. We used
either decode a lot. Um,
>> yeah, we use that all the time, and I think they're error messages have
gotten a lot better. And I know there used
to be a separate package for getting better error messages
out of a salon. And so maybe they took a page out of that
book and rolled it into the library
>> itself.
Yeah, and you know, e think, uh, you know, a
son has, um, basic
ways to signal a failed conversion,
right? Whether it, you know,
has that customary message with the either or
just it's nothing right, which
isn't always informative, and it kind of makes it a little difficult,
But, you know, there's a
certain type
classes that maybe has that either doesn't, which I
think will touch on here in a little bit.
>> Yeah, and like you mentioned with Ace on, there are
lots of different ways. It reports errors, and I think that comes
from under the covers. It's like a parsing library. I don't know if
they implement their own or if they rely on one that's probably at a party
or something like that button. Those parsing libraries
often, uh, implement
either, well, one of the type
classes of alternative or
monitored plus, and both of those have this concept
of like choice. Give me either this one,
or if that one fails, give me this other one, Um,
and as a consequence, they also have the
identity for choice. I think it's identity where
you say this will always fail because normally If you
have a list of choices, what do you do if none of them match,
then you get back. Nothing. Um and
that's very well modeled by maybe. And like you mentioned, it
has instances for these things. But the error
messages were pretty bad because, like with Jason, if you're saying I want
to parse a number or a string or I didn't get either of
them. So the air message you get is worthless.
I don't
>> know. What do you really want from me,
Right? You'll never know. Ha
ha.
>> And there are things you could do to improve this to, like. You could make your
last case and explicit error message
that says, you know, I was looking for one of these values and I didn't get
any of them. And I know that some parsing libraries, like
Mega Par sec do that more or less by
default, where they smartly figure
out what the next token could have been and show you all the
options. Right? Right,
>> right. Yeah, Well,
continuing on,
I think we've come across this. Some in our
own code is you know, the fact that you know Monnet
fail and maybe don't really work well
together. Uh, or
>> they do work well together. Maybe too well, because
fail suggests that you will
get the error message and maybe says, Yeah, I
implement Mom had failed, but I just throw that error message away.
>> It's just like, uh, it's
gives you a false sense of security, for sure are like
assurance. I guess not. Security.
>> Yeah. You feel like oh, I'm doing I'm doing my part. You
know, I'm helping us with exception reports by
providing this beautiful, useful error message. But
where do you feel that way? Nah, Uh
huh,
Yeah, but yeah, and and kind of a related
point is the next thing he talks about with cat maybes
where, um, he suggests using
partition either's instead, which lets
you instead of throwing away the nothing's
partition either's takes in a list of
either's and gives you back a couple where
the left things are in one of them and the right things there in the
other. This is a change we've actually
made to a lot of the scripts that we right
where initially we were using cat maybes
and then either during code review or while we're actually using the
thing we realize.
Wait a minute. We're just dropping these values, like, maybe that's
a problem that we need to know about. So we use partition, either's
instead and then log them out or fail, depending on what it
is. Exactly. You
>> mean, maybe maybe created some issues for
us. We
>> got to get in at least one good punch each episode.
>> You know, I got to I mean s so far, the
listeners haven't thrown me out yet. So that
xem I.T.? Yes,
maybe. Maybe problematic.
Uh huh.
Well, awesome. Yeah. I mean, I would be in favor of
that. I mean, the nice thing is partitioned. I there's, you know, acts the
same way. And if you're in a situation where you don't really care about what the left
say, you can just, you know, continue with the
rights and move forward. Yep.
>> Yeah. Pattern match on one side of that to pull. And it's exactly the same as
you called cat maybes.
>> Yeah. All
>> right. So the next thing he talks about
is like a design pattern, and I don't
want to spend too much time talking about the design pattern
itself. It's called the higher kind of data pattern.
And it's where, instead of defining a record with a bunch
of concrete, um, monem or FIC types
for the fields, you parameter rise the
entire record over some container type.
So the example they give is some
person, and it has a type variable f.
And for each field like name, it is of type
F string and ages of type
F int. And this looks a little goofy to
start. But the idea is, when you're doing
validation, you would have a person where f
is maybe meaning that the values are either not there
yet or didn't pass validation or whatever. And then
once you've validated everything, you change that f
from maybe two identity. And you're saying Okay, now everything
is actually there, and this is, ah, powerful
way. I know. In a previous episode we talked
about, um, parse, don't validate.
And I've used validation a lot as I've been talking about this,
but this is a way to quote unquote parse this
stuff by pushing this information to the type level
and forcing yourself to prove that they're all there
>> mhm s o. Okay, so with this
higher kind of day. The pattern,
um, you know, he kind of
launches end with maybe all the way.
Um, and obviously in this post,
he's kind of saying, hey, be weary of maybe maybe it's
not the best case. Uh, so
he starts and kind of moves towards
Yeah, I guess. Using either in this I
got a little confusing that for me for a minute. Um,
but what do you kind of parts of the next section
of this higher kind of data? Strict pattern.
>> This one gets a little tricky because with
maybe it's very easy to flip this around. So
if you have a person where f is, maybe
it's easy to turn that into a maybe
person where f his identity? Because
you try to get every field out of it.
And if it works, you're done. Um, but
often what you If you had a person
where f is either string,
you have a choice. Do you want to stop as
soon as one thing goes wrong, or do you want to
try to go as far as you can and collect as
many error messages as possible and then return all of them?
So the example I always think about here is if
you're trying to sign up for some service and
you load the form and then you just submit it and it comes back and
says, Hey, first name is required like OK, cool. I'll fill
out the first name, submit the form again. Last name is also
required. Okay, fill that out and then, you know, do
that three or four times you get a little frustrated, whereas if you just
hit it once and it comes back and says all of these things are required,
that's the difference that I'm talking about here.
And he recommends a package called
Barbies, which I had not heard of before. But it has a great
description on Hack Ege. It says,
Um, types that are parametric on a
funked er which is what we're talking about here. This higher kind of
data pattern types that are parametric on
a funked er are like Barbies that have an outfit for each
role. So maybe he's an outfit. Either is an outfit,
identities and outfit. I just think that's a cute description of
this. Um, but
yeah, the package the Barbies package gives helpers for
doing this error collection that I was just
describing noise.
Um, so, yeah, I'm not sure I have much more to
say about HKD. Was there any other stuff you wanted to know about it?
>> No, I think that was good. I Yes. As I'm
re parsing through it with what you're saying, Um,
you know, the fact that it, you know, returns
this either list of fuel info and your
example was great. So I really appreciate that.
>> Yeah. Happy to help. Um,
And then he, uh, he goes on the post
author here. Goes on to talk about Java
beans, which are I wasn't aware of this as,
like, a thing. I have worked with Java, but it's been a long time.
And, uh, apparently job of beans air, like a
class that can have an empty
thing. Instance, Yeah. Instance. Or like, a
default value or something like that. Um, but I
had a hard time following this section because I
couldn't get these things to type. Check in my head with the
G.H.C. that's running in my head. And then I tried with a real
G.H.C., and it wouldn't type check there either,
so I don't know what to say about this doesn't make
sense to me.
>> Yeah. I mean, you know, 11 would
think that, You know, if you
have ah, person of the
maybe funked er right under. Maybe the function.
Okay. Should I make sure
speaking here? Because I know someone in the Internet will tell me
I'm wrong, but that's okay. Uh, you know, in person of
identity, then you
try to mix them together. That's not
kind of work. I mean, and that's that whole compiler thing in
your head. Not working. Um,
I mean, if you wanted to, you could run, maybe and
have it to, you know, return just 10 rather than
identity. Yeah,
>> but then the whole example would be different.
>> So a little, a little more to
be desired. Here. Maybe there's just something we're missing or
misreading. Um, so
yeah, uh, no, I
think you know, that section was
informative, but still a little confusing.
So we'll keep moving
eso. When we were kind of prepping for this
show, we talked. We kind of stumbled
across this next section, which is the maybe first
mano a mano, Wakefield's.
And we were
also a little like first And then we
realized first was just really a wrapper around maybe,
Um uh, and you know, then
things got really interesting when we, uh, made a grandpa
toddler That happened somewhere later in this
example.
>> Yeah. So, like you mentioned first is a new
type wrapper around maybe. And the thing
that it does for you is pick. Um, when
you do like a semi group of pinned that
diamond operator or mm penned either one,
Uh, it will give you the first value.
That is just something.
So if you're one on the left, is that nothing? You'll get the
one on the right, And if the one on the left is a just, then
you'll get the one on the left, regardless of what the two values are. So it
doesn't smash them together, like with strings or add
them together, like with some or any of that stuff.
And this curious
grandpa toddler value is where they take
two people values and smush
them together using this first concept. And you
can end up with some weird data Where,
uh, yeah, it's just
like, you know, pretty much arbitrarily grabbing fields from
one and the other and pushing them together.
>> At that point, you get a grandpa or you get a some
person with the name Grandpa in a native woman. I
mean, they must have started when they were really, really
young.
>> Um and I'll just say for this we have
done this in our code base, a fair amount where we have
custom data types, that we have
semi group instances to combine them
together. But usually we implement
those instances by hand rather than
leaning on these, um, kind of convenience new
type rappers that the semi group and Mon oId modules
exposed like first and last in product and all this
other stuff. Um, so this hasn't been a
problem for us in practice. And
also we don't implement them for, like are quote
unquote business objects like person
or whatever. Instead, it's usually for
configuration or some type of aggregation that were building
up. So I do see
that this is a problem, but we haven't
experienced it,
>> right? Doesn't mean it's not out there. It's just
firsthand, very little like, Yeah, it doesn't seem like a problem
does. But because we don't use that, so
another big thing for you
know that maybe has going for it is the
fact that it has, you know, You know, we spoke
earlier about having alternative instance and having mawr instances
than either, Uh, which
allows to be a little easier to work with, because you're like, Oh, yeah, it's got the
instance I need here. I'll just go with maybe over either,
rather than trying to create your own alternative
instance for either.
>> Yeah, if you want to either write code,
that is probably more FIC or use code.
That's probably more fake than it turns out that you can use maybe
a lot more often than you can use, either.
And I think that's a good segue into the next section.
And almost the last section, which is Ah, we've
spent this whole time trashing. Maybe. But when is the good
time to use? Maybe
>> Mm. Oh, good old. Maybe
right. And, you know, we kind of touched on it in the beginning, right?
Um, you know, three authors here says he
follows a old design principle
called pastas Law. Where
you know, Lena input strict
output. Um, right. You know, things that
can be put input to the system can be more flexible than
what returned from the system, right?
>> So in this particular case, that means
like using either for your input would be
more strict because you would be requiring people to give
you this error information. But
with a maybe you're just saying I need
to know whether it's there or not. I don't need to know why it wasn't there,
so that's a little more
>> lenient. So
don't make me woo
e.
>> Do think it's funny that he explicitly mentions data
dot map. Look up as somewhere. That's probably
fine to use. Maybe because for
me, that's one place where I want either. And when I talk about
in our code base, where we decorate, maybe values with error
information, it's often on this where we're doing
three or four look ups in a row, and we want to know which
one failed. And it's really convenient to say, Oh, I couldn't find this
key rather than just getting back
>> nothing. Yeah, maybe that's
a future enhancement.
>> Mhm. Yeah, we'll have another.
Yeah, well, we end up doing a lot of note. Look
up. Using the help function we talked
>> about e mean at this point we should just probably,
you know, pull a new instance of look up into
our prelude that does that
>> has that on their
>> Yeah, probably could make life a little
easier. But, you know, note.
Look up. Wasn't the worst thing in the world either,
but, Well, awesome. Yeah, I think
that was, uh, Cem. Good
cases for using, maybe. And, you know, overall,
maybe either is the way to go, but, you know, maybe has its
place. That's why it's in the ecosystem.
>> This is a compelling argument to me, and I've I've
found I haven't, you know, crystallized this opinion
myself for or thought too much about it before. But reading
through this post, I was like, Yeah, you know, most of the time I would prefer
something that dealt with either or something. I see
more fake toe either rather than maybe so that when
something goes wrong, I'll know why.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So
to kind of recap the
authors causes for thinking, you know, for
saying it's overused. Uh, yeah. He
says, you know, using maybe is simpler than either,
um, you know, coding with Maybe it's
tercer, which is a fun, weird
tercer uh, maybe
is more expressive, really having more
instances available to it on. And then you know,
the sophisticated abstractions can can
obscure the common sense. But,
you know, you may be it's gonna make
it do what you want. It can
make it do what you want. But you may also be missing information and
losing out on things you expect to be there.
>> Yeah, I think this ties into the previous one where, since
maybe has more instances, you can use it with more
abstractions, and it will
probably all type check. But you may end up with something that's very
confusing either to use or to debug.
>> Precisely. Well,
awesome, Taylor. Well, thanks for being on the show with me
today. Thank you. Listeners for tuning in.
Um, Taylor, where can they find
us?
>> Well, uh, they could probably just google for high school
weekly. That might be the easiest way, but if you want to go straight
to the source, our website is high school weekly
dot news. We're on Twitter. Our handle
is Haskell Weekly. Were on Reddit. Same
handle were on git hub, same handle.
And if you want to suggest
something, tow us, you could send an email to
info at Haskell weekly dot news.
>> They can't find us on MYSPACE
way
>> had to take down our MySpace page.
>> Just Yeah.
Okay. That's okay, though, because
high school, the podcast is brought to you by I.T. pro
T.V. three e learning platform for I.T.
professionals. And also employer way.
Thank them for letting us do such an incredible show.
Uh, they're also very generous
because they would love to offer all of our listeners a
30% discount code for the lifetime of
the prescription by using Haskell Weekly
30 at check out. And that will get you
30% off the lifetime of that subscription.
So go check
it out. Yeah,
>> and I think that will do it for
>> us this week. See you next week.
Peace